with a 7-Day ceasefire in Gaza over
fighting has resumed between Israel and
Hamas caught in the middle are civilians
from both sides there raised questions
about proportionality and accountability
so is Israel meeting its obligations
under the laws of war this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello there and welcome to the program
I'm Laura Kyle after mediators failed to
extend a 7-Day ceasefire in Gaza Israel
has resumed its bombardment of the strip
air strikes have targeted houses and
refugee camps in the North Center and
the south of Gaza Palestinians are
already suffering a humanitarian crisis
the UN says 80% of the population is has
been forcibly displaced and the Health
Care system has collapsed the Israeli
Army's offensive raises questions of
responsibility and accountability prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu says Israel
is acting in self-defense after the
attack by Hamas on October the 7th
killed 1,200 people under international
law Israel is the occupying power in
Gaza and the West Bank and is obliged to
protect all the people there but Israel
doesn't recognize Palestine as a state
and says Hamas has bases in hospitals
and residential areas making them
legitimate military targets we'll be
unpacking the complexities of this
argument with our guests in just a
moment but first this report from Finton
Monahan Israel released Muhammad nazal
as part of a prisoner exchange agreed
with Hamas the young man spoke of
mistreatment at the hands of Israeli
authorities one of the guys was so badly
beaten his cellmates kept calling and
yelling for someone to help and they
finally arrived they felt his pulse
through the bars he was dead after that
they were just insulters when the
soldier came to fetch me before my
release he said they would hunt me down
and bring me back to
jail some Israeli captiv released by
Hamas also spoke of the harsh conditions
of their detention in Gaza several
treaties governing the treatment of
civilians soldiers and prisoners of War
are known collectively as the law of
armed conflict it applies to government
forces and non-state armed groups such
as
Hamas Israel's treatment of Palestinian
prisoners its policies towards
Palestinians in the occupied territories
and most recently its military campaign
in Gaza are raising questions about
whether Israel is respecting
International humanitarian
law the treaties state that combatants
avoid civilian infrastructure and
concentrate only on Military targets but
Israel has repeatedly bombed hospitals
homes and schools in Gaza saying Hamas
uses them for military purposes it is a
legitimate military Target and why is
that because Hamas uses all locates all
of their offices headquarters their
research and development and all of
their other military assets if it's
above ground they locate themselves in
civilian
buildings then there's the civilian
death toll Hamas was widely condemned
for its military offensive in southern
in Israel on October the 7th the Israeli
government said 1200 people were killed
and more than 200 were taken
captive but since then the Israeli
bombardment of Gaza has killed more than
15,000 Palestinians according to the
Gaza Health
Ministry critics say Israel's response
is not proportionate another principle
in the laws governing armed
conflict Israel maintains its attacks in
Gaza are self-defense but even its
biggest Ally the US has called for more
protection of civilians but Israel has
the most sophisticated one of the most
sophisticated militaries in the world it
is capable of neutralizing the threat
posed by Hamas while minimizing harm to
innocent men women and children and it
has an obligation to do so the legal
situation is further Complicated by the
status of Palestine which Israel does
not consider an independent state as the
war drags on and the death toll Rises
Israel is facing growing accusations
that it's falling short of its
obligations under international law
Vincent Mahan for Inside
[Music]
Story let's discuss this further let's
bring in our guests in ramala in the
occupied West Bank Mustafa barouti
Secretary General of the Palestinian
national initiative and a former
information Minister for the Palestinian
Authority in New York ammed abuu Legal
researcher and advocacy officer at alhak
an independent Palestinian human rights
organization and in Liverpool in the UK
triestino Marinello a professor of law
at Liverpool John Moors University and a
member of the legal team representing
Gaza victims in the international
criminal court a very warm welcome to
all of you triestino this Friday Israel
resumed air strikes on Gaza once again
killing civilians in huge numbers it's
now also targeting what we're supposed
to be safe areas in the South can you
outline for us what are supposed to be
the rules of war in this conflict well
first of all many thanks for having me
today I mean discussing the rule of law
looking at the situation in Gaza from an
international perspective means first of
all to discuss the context in which
these hostilities have taking place
hostilities and context cannot be
assessed separately and the context is
the one in which there has been now
almost 17 year blockade of Gaza Strip a
blockade which has produced a number of
Crisis and which has cause a situation
that according to the United Nations
different bodies of the UN was even
before the S of October unacceptable un
sustainable and deplorable a situation
that was defined was defined by the
Secretary General of the United Nation
has a collective punishment a
segregation of the civilian population
in Gaza blockade means under
international law occupation of the Gaza
Strip the entire Palestinian territory
under international law so not only the
West Bank including East Jerusalem but
also the Gaza STP is still occupied
despite the 2005 disengagement of the of
the Israeli troops Gaza is still
occupied under international law for a
very simple reason because Israeli
Authority still exercise an effective
control of the entire Gaza trip
controlling almost his land borders
territorial Waters um air space uh even
um tax revenues are under the effective
control of the Israeli authorities so we
are talking of a context which is still
occupied under international law Okay so
we've got to the occupying power Mustafa
bouti what are the obligations of the
occupying power in Gaza at the moment
but also also in the West Bank the
obligation of the occupying power is to
take care of the civilians who are under
their
occupation and Israel is doing exactly
the opposite not only in Gaza Strip but
also in West
Bank the whole Oso agreement was used by
Israel in the West Bank for instance to
get rid of any responsibility towards
the people who are under their
occupation and transfer it to the
Palestinian Authority which continued to
be an authority without Authority
and an authority under occupation
deprived from any real power so the game
that Israel plays all the time and now
wants to repeat it in Gaza is to
reoccupy Gaza completely control it
totally with military power but find
somebody else to take care of the
humanitarian needs of the people but not
only that they've destroyed 60% of all
homes in Gaza they've destroyed all the
infrastructure in Gaza a city so
practically not only they are not taking
care of the needs of the people under
their occupation they're actually
destroying any possibility for life of
the people under their occupation
because their actual goal is really the
ethnic cleansing of Gaza completely and
that is the reason why they decided to
renew their attacks now in Gaza there
isn't any part of international law in
my opinion that Israel did not violate
okay is is itself was established as a
settler Colonial project through a huge
operation of ethnic cleansing against
70% of the Palestinian people who were
forced out of their land out of their
country to become
refugees ammed do you see uh the
Palestinians situation the the the
violent resistance against occupation
that we are seeing that we have seen is
there a Al ity with within that well um
using uh resistance in any form
including armed struggle U um to resist
occupation uh is permitted under
international law there's no questions
there the Palestinians have the right to
resist the occupation now which means of
resistance they choose it's up to the
Palestinian people this includes armed
resistance but it has to be in
accordance and in compliance with
international law in particular uh the
law governing the conduct of hostilities
that is international humanitarian
law attack then if we look at the attack
by Hamas on October the 7th it's been
called a war crime 1,200 people were
killed about 240 people were taken
captive both breaking international law
but as a non-state actor in this
conflict what rules of war is Hamas
Bound by uh the same that Israel is by
by the the um the application of
international humanitarian law applies
to all parties uh uh to the conduct of
hostilities so uh um but one needs to
differentiate I nobody can claim that an
attack in its
totality uh is illegal because we just
said unoccupied people have the right to
resist the occupation so this goes back
to the rhetorical question do you cond
Hamas for example and this is a way to
derail the discussion one cannot ask a
Palestinian to condemn hamas's attack in
its totality but when talks about
Israeli usage of us use of force talk
about technicality of IHL whether a
certain strike was proportionate or not
so the attack in and by itself so for
example attacking Israeli soldiers
dragging them out of of Tanks as we saw
and taking them to Gaza this in
particular this exact incident is
remitted under international law any
attack against the UB Army is permitted
under international law as long as it
complies with the rules of international
humanitarian law on the other hand any
attack on civilians is prohibited under
international law and could amount to a
war crime uh and the body to decide that
has to be an independent investigative
body uh and the experience of of the
situation in pales this body cannot
be any investigative body from from
Israel Israel has a history
of denying justice of systematic
impunity a history of pathologically
lying about the responsibility of its uh
soldiers and ensuring that they enjoy
absolute uh impunity and I think this is
because the the whole Israeli setler
Colonial project an apar regime is a
premise on a promise of impunity to its
soldiers so we will definitely get onto
the issue of accountability a little
later in the discussion triestino don't
think we've really got to the Crux yet
of what the actual rules in a conflict
are because all conflicts are governed
by the rules of law international
humanitarian law Geneva conventions can
you outline for us for our viewers what
exactly they are well first of all I
mean it's arguable that if this is a
occupied territory also the G St as we
said before that Israel has a right to
self-defense against and occupied
territory has made states claim but
assuming I mean that once the conflict
has started the military operation has
started Israel Authority have to comply
first of all with fundamental principles
of international humanitarian law first
of all principle of Distinction so
making a clear distinction between
military objectives and civilian object
and civilians principle of
proportionality so not not putting in
place disproportionate attacks and
finally principle of precaution
providing civan population with
effective warnings for instance all of
have been violated and there is clear
evidence in relation to this Goda War
it's not a novelty all the military
operation against Goda have been
characterized by violation by the Israel
authority of these three principles in
particular of the principle of
Distinction by putting in place
indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian objects we could provide
plenty of examples in s October in this
regard for instance the shifa hospital
or the other medical units in Gaza which
have a protected status under
International humanitarian law have been
intentionally attacked by the Israel
Authority or the attack of the 31st of
October against jabalia refugee camp in
which the Israeli authorities have
claimed that there was a military aass
military commander well there was no
evidence for that but even if Israel
should provide clear evidence of that
that's that does not make the civilian
group in the jabalia refugee camp as a
military Target according to
International humanitarian law is also
clearly established by international
criminal tribunals Mustafa bagti what do
you make of the evidence that Israel has
provided so
far what evidence sorry the evidence
that it has put on social media we're
seeing videos of tunnels we're seeing um
them going through areas that it said
was where the hostages were being held
what do you make of
those first of all let's say that
Netanyahu is nothing but a pathological
ler besides being a war criminal and his
army and his spokes people com are
repeating lies after lies even after
these lies were revoked even by the
American Media you remember the whole
story about decapitation of children CNN
had to apologize for reporting that the
rape of women Los Angeles Times had to
apologize for reporting that the number
of Palestinians killed and and and now
we have the names and the dates of birth
and everything and the ID numbers of all
people killed so Israel continues to
tell lies after lies after lies to
justify what what I'm quite interested
to within the bounds of this discussion
though is whether this kind of evidence
would ever hold up in the court of
law absolutely not of course not what
will hold in the court of law if there
is an independent real Commission of
international law that is not biased to
Israel and that is not subjected or
vulnerable to American pressure Israel
will be judged for the following the
following war crimes the The Continuous
occupation the system of aparti the
ethnic cleansing of Palestinians the
genocide that is conducted against
people in Gaza and the collective
punishment against the whole population
not only in Gaza but also in the West
Bank in addition to rejecting and
refusing to implement no less than 1,000
resolutions of the United Nations
General Assembly and the United Nation
Security Council all of that was done by
Israel why because the Western
governments and especially the United
States of America and in particular the
government of Britain have allowed
Israel to be imp punitive to
international law have allowed Israel to
be unaccountable have treated Israel
differently from every other country in
the world and look at the comparison a
very clear comparison between the way
the world treats the situation in
Ukraine and that in Palestine in Ukraine
they support what they say the occupied
people in Palestine they are supporting
the occupa and I mean by that the United
States and Britain and some other
Western governments okay that is I just
want to jump in there because we will be
we will be looking at uh the
international community's response just
a little later I'm still just trying to
uh pin down what exactly it is within
the law that Israel is is breaking and
ammed because Israel we have to note
that Israel continuously insists that
its conduct is in accordance with
international law and it does seem so
far to have the backing of the US in
that however it's also cited as having a
loose interpretation of the
international law so how much room is
there as a lawyer how much room is there
for interpretation of this international
law but where to be honest to say Israel
has a loose interpretation is even an
understatement Israel has a distorted
interpretation of international law it
makes a mockery of international uh
humanitarian law and its violations of
uh of the laws of all and of
international humanitarian law are
abundantly clear uh unless for those who
don't want to see it or who want to
follow Israel's lies and and propaganda
Israel claims first and foremost that uh
it's acting in self-defense it's
important also to to uh to explain that
a bit the body of law that governs the
right to self-defense for states is
regulated under article 51 of the United
Nation chter this is a right to States
when they're attacked by another state
not by non-state actors like resistance
uh groups and even if there is a doubt
about a state's right to respond to
attacks coming from arms groups
definitely there is no doubt that an
occupying power does not have the right
to defend itself against the people it
occupies because naturally it has
positioned itself as the aggressor as
the occupier and as a matter of fact the
uh the the highest court in the United
Nation the principal judicial organ of
the un uh namely the international court
of justice and the 2004 advisory opinion
has already said because Israel argued
self-defense back then and the court
said clearly that the right to
self-defense is irrelevant when it comes
to the occupied Palestinian territory so
this has to be uh clarified at the
outset in terms of Israel's violation
it's important to differentiate between
different kinds of of of violations
Israel is committing uh war crimes uh uh
during the conduct of uh hostilities and
this is a question of IHL principles
like proportionality distinction and
other uh uh important principles but
Israel is also committing uh continuous
war crimes when it comes to to Palestine
and I think one of the most important
crimes of those is the transfer of
population to the occupied territor also
known as settlements this is one of the
most important crimes because it
underlines the sitler colonial nature of
Israel occupation and it's COC Colonial
ideology Zionism that is a premised on
the arer of the Palestinian people and
replacing them in their indigenous land
and that is the the the fundamental
issue and this is a crime that is let um
I jump in there because I want triestino
to to look at that a little bit more um
all these violations they're held in a
huge file that the IC has uh former
prosecutor Fatu Ben suda began uh an
investigation in 200 21 we've never seen
anything come of that why not well first
of all I would like to add to the
violations we have been talking I mean
that there is already evidence for the
international criminal court to start an
investigation in relation to war crimes
we have mentioned but also the crimes
against humanity or forcable transfer
looking at the evacuation order of the
entire population from the north of Gaza
to the South and there is also according
to several Express International
organizations of the ongoing Commission
of genocide in Gaza as you correctly say
the former prosecutor open an
investigation in 2021 into the Gaza
situation it was a decision with a very
narrow scope of the investigation
looking at 2014 war crimes committed in
Gaza at crimes committed within the
context of the great match of return and
at the settlements in the West Bank as a
war crime unfortunately since the new
prosecutor has tooken office the British
barister Kim Khan he has been very
reluctant in putting in place any
effective investigation into in this
situation
the answer to your question can maybe is
that the court is under incredible
pressure not to put in place effective
investigation when it comes to Nationals
from powerful countries that applied to
Iraq for the British troops that applied
to Afghanistan for the US Nationals and
still applying to to to to Palestine
this is a clear case of double standards
as has been mentioned before the court
has shown to be able to react promptly
to Commission of international crime
another context in few days there was a
request for arrest warrant against
Russian Nationals in particular against
the President Putin we haven't seen this
it's since 2009 that Palestine has tried
to engage with the IC but after 14 years
there has never been a simple request of
arrest warrant or some months to appear
in other words there has never been a
case before the international criminal
court and even in these days the
prosecutor is still very vague when it
comes when he talks about about ongoing
crimes committed against Palestinian
victims and this
is Mustafa I just want to bring you in
at this point because we we Circle back
now to your earlier point that you were
making about International pressure or
lack of it ICC prosecutor Karam Khan is
is visiting Israel at the request of the
victims of the October 7th Hamas attack
he's also going to be visiting ramala
what would be your message to
him he should go to Gaza not to ramala
he should do he he is welcomed in ramala
but he should go go also to Gaza that's
where most of the war crimes are
happening and uh let me say you say to
you that we are totally unsatisfied with
the behavior of Mr Karim Khan there has
been already so many evidence about the
Israeli war crimes in 2014
2012 2008 in Gaza and he never looked at
it he never started the investigation in
my opinion he's very vulnerable to
American and Israeli pressures and I
don't expect much of him when he's
coming to visit Israel who did not allow
bin suda before to visit Israel that
that is not a very good indication when
he is not saying that he should be also
visiting
Gaza and and let me say here that that
is exactly the problem the problem is
that Israel is allowed to be outside the
ranks of international law and one of
the issues that should be raised here is
is the fact that Israel has declared war
on occupied people not once not twice
but several times war on occupied people
is illegal is unacceptable by
International warw they are occupying us
and at the same time declaring war on us
and and that by itself of course is a
very grave violation but but in my
opinion the United States of America
Britain and some other Western
governments are equally
responsible not only in terms we just
drawing to the end of our discussions I
just want to bring back ammed because
without the application of international
law to Israel and Palestine some are
warning that this conflict will only
continue do you agree with that 100%
this is the the fact that we have this
situation is the systematic impunity
that Israel has been uh enjoying and
ensuring for uh its soldiers I think um
this current situation um is a very
important one not only for Palestine but
for the whole body of of international
law and the international K Court in
particular I think this is the liip m
test for its credibility I totally agree
with what you're uh uh with what the
other guests have said that it's utterly
unacceptable the way that the court is
approaching this situation you need not
to forget that since Karim Khan took
office and became the persecutor he
hasn't issued one statement before the
7th of October despite Israel's
continuing violations despite Israel's
attacking worshippers inside lamos the
holiest place for Muslims around the
world an act that could have provoked a
regional war and he didn't think it's
enough to issue a statement and I'm just
gonna jump in there to give the last
word to triestino because we've only got
a minute left I want to know from
tritina who's going to be at the IC do
you think Israel is going to be held to
account
well this is uh I mean so far we know
that this has been very difficult and
it's apparently from statements of the
prosecutor I mean this is
uh it's not easy that this is going it's
likely this is going to happen but
that's the reason why the pressure on
the office of the prosecutor and on the
court must be kept High not only by
states which have submitted some
referrals to the court in this regard
but also to Civil Society organization I
would like to conclude to say that
without the work of Palestinian Civil
Society organization in the West Bank in
the Gaza stre there will be no
investigation at the ICC at all it's
just thanks to them that the court has
been able to open an investigation okay
and many thanks to you for talking about
this subject today Mustafa bouti ammed
Abu and triestino
Marinello and thank you too for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website that's ala.com
for further discussion do go to our
Facebook page that's facebook.com AJ
insid story you can also join the
conversation on X our handlers at AJ
inside story from me Laura Kyle and the
whole team here it's bye for
[Music]
now